Easy (1)
Crime: Fraud

Location: Prime section of real estate

Clues: Perpetrator lured victim with deceitful promises of
a better life. Only crime in Bible committed by an animal.
Victim also involved husband in cover-up scheme.

Hint: Read the crime report in Genesis 3:1-7.

Answer: Satan’s deception of Eve. Significance: Set up the 
human race for sin.

-----

Easy (2)
Crime: Breach of contract, illegal confinement

Location: Egypt

Victims: Residents of Goshen in Egypt

Clues: Perpetrator was the most powerful man in the land. Had 
an annoying habit of rescinding promises made to Hebrews who 
wanted to worship. Perpetrator continued in his ways despite 
loss of livestock and natural disasters. Eventually suffered 
great loss in his own family.

Answer: The pharaoh of Egypt. Significance: Pharaoh’s willful 
disobedience of God’s commands led him and. his people into 
disaster.

-----

Easy(3)
Crime: Cruelty to animals

Location: Timnah

Victim: A young lion

Clues: Perpetrator was known for prodigious strength and tore 
the lion apart with his hands. Some claim he acted in self-defense. 
Young man would later become a judge of Israel. He was also a Nazirite.

Answer: Samson. Significance: Samson's great strength was a gift, but 
he did not always use it wisely.

-----

Easy (4)
Charge: Illegal worship

Location: Babylon, then under the rule of the Medes

Defendant: Able administrative officer of one of the most powerful 
kingdoms on earth. Reached his position despite the fact that he 
belonged to a conquered people.

Clues: Others in the kingdom were jealous of administrator’s power 
and position. They decided to frame him by making prayer to anyone 
(save the king) illegal. Conspirators knew that the defendant had 
a habit of praying three times each day. He continued his practice
and was arrested in the act. He was sentenced to death.

Answer: Daniel. Significance: No one has a right to a higher 
allegiance from us than God.

-----

Easy (5)
Crime: Murder

Location: Jerusalem

Means: Hasty, farcical trial and quick execution

Clues: The crime had countless witnesses, and its results are still 
being felt today. The form of death is one of the most agonizing 
and painful. Victim was put to death with two others charged with 
unrelated crimes.

Hint: The crime is retold in all four Gospels—Matthew, Mark, Luke, 
and John.

Answer: The Sanhedrin and Pontius Pilate. Significance: Although 
Jesus’ death was entirely unfair from a human point of view, he 
fulfilled God’s purpose, took on our blame, and gave us eternal life
through his death and resurrection.

-----

Easy (6)
Crime: Attempted rape

Location: One of the notorious cities of the Plain

Victims: Two mysterious visitors to city, who were visiting Lot, 
himself a newcomer to the area

Clues: Fiends attempted to break into Lot’s house, but were struck 
blind. Villains most certainly died the next day in tremendous 
firestorm.

Answer: The perverted inhabitants of Sodom, who lusted after Lot’s
visitors. Significance: This horrifying incident confirmed the 
necessity of the judgment that destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.

-----

Easy (7)
Crime: False worship, fornication, drunkenness

Location: Wilderness of Sinai

Clues: Out of boredom and disobedience, people fashioned an idol 
out of their own jewelry and worshiped it. Ringleader was brother 
of the religious leader of the nation. Incident brought severe 
reprisals.

Answer: The Israelite refugees from Egypt, who, led by Aaron, 
worshiped the gold calf. Significance: Aaron’s foolish concession 
to the demands of the people led to widespread misery and death.

-----

Easy (8)
Crime: Cursing and blasphemy

Location: Elah Valley, between Israel and the Philistine
city-states

Weapon: Boastful tongue

Clues: Perpetrator was a feared warrior in the Philistine army. He 
challenged the armies of Israel to produce an appropriate match for 
him. Warrior stood between nine and ten feet tall. Despite his 
strength, he was stunned by a high-velocity rock and killed with his 
own sword.

Answer: Goliath of Gath. Significance: God avenged the Philistine’s 
curses through his servant David, an unlikely warrior.

-----

Easy (9)
Crime: Adultery

Location: Jerusalem

Circumstances: A military leader failed to lead his troops but 
remained at home, restless. His boredom left him open to temptation.

Clues: Perpetrator was in a position to view the victim as she was 
taking an evening bath. Perpetrator had the power to order the victim 
to appear in his home. Victim became pregnant as a result of the 
perpetrator’s actions.

Hint: This event is recorded in 2 Samuel 11:1-5.

Answer: David, with Bathsheba. Significance: This impulsive action 
opened David’s family to a terrible series of sins.

-----

Easy (10)
Crime: Murder, resisting arrest, and obstruction of justice

Location: Goshen, Egypt

Weapon: Unknown

Clues: Fugitive is alleged to have murdered a member of the ruling 
class. Public awareness of the crime resulted in his loss of royal 
stature and his escape from Egypt. Fugitive suspected of having ties 
with Hebrew slaves.

Hint: The fugitive’s identity can be found in Exodus 2:11-17.

Answer: Moses, who fled Egypt when his killing of the Egyptian guard 
was made public. Significance: Poor decisions often lead to actions of
panic.

-----

Intermediate (1)
Crime: Attempted murder

Location: Jerusalem

Weapon: Spear

Clues: Just before the incident, the intended victim was playing harp 
in the king’s palace. The intended victim was an extremely popular 
young soldier who would eventually become king. The perpetrator had 
reason to feel jealous toward the young musician.

Hint: This incident is described in 1 Samuel 18:1-13.

Answer: Saul, who attempted to pin David to the wall with his spear. 
Significance: Demonstrated the fact that Saul was rapidly losing control 
of himself and his kingdom.

-----

Intermediate (2)
Crime: Manslaughter
Location: The city of Rabbah
Circumstances: An outstanding soldier was deliberately
placed in harm’s way so that he was killed.
Clues: Soldier had recently been ordered home on leave
to try to hide the fact that his wife had just been made
pregnant by his commander in chief. Out of solidarity with
his fellow soldiers, he refused to spend time with his wife,
ruining the plan. Apparently, losing face with one of his
brave soldiers seemed worse to the commander than
having him killed. The soldier returned to the battleground
unknowingly carrying his own death orders.
Hint: This tragic episode is recorded in 2 Samuel 11:6-27.
Answer: David, who arranged for Uriah’s
death. Significance: David’s origi¬
nal sin of adultery led to other
sins, including murder.

Intermediate (3)
Crime: Murder
Location: Perpetrator’s farm
Weapon: Unknown
Clues: Perpetrator reportedly both angry and jealous of
victim. Perpetrator and victim were brothers.
Hint: The details are recorded in Genesis 4:1-14.
Answer: Cain, who killed his brother, Abel.
Significance: The crime of murder
became a part of human history
within one generation of Adam.

Intermediate (4)
Crime: Fraud
Location: Land of Canaan
Method: Roast venison and animal skins
Clues: Victim was deceived by the perpetrator’s clever
disguise. Perpetrator’s accomplice was his own mother.
Still other clues: Item taken was a valuable birthright
blessing. Victim was the father of the perpetrator.
Hint: Read the crime report in Genesis 27:1-29.
Answer: Jacob, who tricked his father, Isaac,
into giving him the blessing meant
for Esau. Significance: God’s plan
will work out in spite of humans’
efforts to advance it improperly or
alter it by their choices.

Intermediate (5)
Crime: Assault
Location: Near the Jabbok River
Clues: Perpetrator engaged a stronger opponent in a
wrestling match. The match was a draw, but the
perpetrator was left with a limp.
Hint: The fight report is found in Genesis 32:22-30.
Answer: Jacob, who wrestled all night with
God’s messenger. Significance:
Jacob was not too proud to cling
to God desperately. His unashamed desperation was
rewarded with blessing.


Intermediate (6)
Crime: Illegal pro-life activity
Location: Goshen, Egypt
Clues: Fear of a population explosion among tribes of
Israel led to aggressive infanticide laws. Partial-birth and
even post-birth killing of Hebrew male children was legally
required. Medical staff took drastic measures to keep the
children alive anyway. Parents hid newborns. Male children
continued to survive and multiply.
Hint: This exciting episode is told in Exodus 1:15-22.
Answer: The Hebrew midwives, Shiprah
and Puah. Significance: God’s
laws supersede men’s laws when
they conflict.

Intermediate (7)
Crime: Thirty killings that could be called the “Wardrobe
Murders”
Location: Ashkelon, city-state of the Philistines
Weapons: Unknown
Clues: Victims were all known as stylish dressers whose
bodies were found missing their clothing. Young men in
Timnah were reportedly seen wearing the missing clothing.
When questioned, the young men claimed the fine robes
had been given to them as a present by the groom at a
recent wedding they had attended.
Hint: This episode in one judge's life is recorded in Judges
14:10-20.
Answer: Samson. Significance: One of the
results of Samson’s refusal to
see his strength as a gift God
meant to be carefully kept and
used.

Intermediate (8)
Crime: Rape
Location: Jerusalem
Setting: The royal palace
Clues: The victim tried to avoid the shame by agreeing
beforehand that she would marry the perpetrator.
Perpetrator despised and rejected the victim after the
rape. Victim was the half sister of the perpetrator.
Hint: This shameful crime is recorded in 2 Samuel
13:1-19.
Answer: Amnon, son of David, who raped
his half sister Tamar. Significance: Amnon’s ugly deed would
eventually result in his own death
at the hand of Absalom.

Internediate (9)
Crime: Attempted genocide
Location: Suza, capital of the Medo-Persian empire
Means: Intended victims were targeted for reprisals
because their faith made them unwilling to bow before a
prideful government official.
Clues: The official was willing to manipulate the king and
his power to take vengeance on an entire ethnic group.
The king gave the official permission to act without full
knowledge of the plan. The queen became the key person
to thwart the planned genocide. She was actually part of
the targeted group herself.
Hint: This story of political intrigue is recounted in Esther
3:1-4:14.
Answer: The Jewish people were targeted
for death by Haman, second highest official of Persia. 
Significance: God arranged people and events
ahead of time to prevent the plan
from being carried out.

Intermediate (10)
Crime: Treason
Location: Jerusalem
Means: A clever public relations campaign stole the loyalty
of the king’s subjects.
Clues: Rebel was a charismatic man whose father had
never disciplined him. One of his most notable features
was his thick, long hair. He had also been involved in a
sordid murder and was estranged from the king for some
time.
Hint: The details of this episode are recorded in 2 Samuel
15:1-16:23.
Answer: Absalom, who tried to take the throne of Israel from his 
father, David. Significance: David’s sin
with Bathsheba (and his poor parenting skills) had resulted in 
family and national rebellion.

Advanced (1)
Crime: Theft
Location: Paddan-aram
Weapon: None
Clues: Victim’s relatives disappeared suddenly. The
household shrine was apparently looted. Jacob left his
father-in-law’s neighborhood unannounced and traveled
back to Canaan.
Hint: The thief is revealed in Genesis 31:17-21.
Answer: Rachel, who stole the pagan idols
from her father’s house. Significance: The deception led to a
tense standoff between Jacob and
Laban, but the two were finally reconciled.

Advanced (2)
Crime: Rape
Location: City of Shechem in Canaan
Weapon: None reported
Clues: Perpetrator offered to marry the victim. Father of
the perpetrator approached father of the girl with an offer
of marriage.
Hint: Find the names of those involved in Genesis 34:1-6.
Answer: Shechem, son of Hamor, who
raped Dinah, Jacob’s daughter.
Significance: One sin often paves
the way for other tragedies.

Advanced (3)
Crime: Attempted rape
Location: Egypt
Weapon: None
Clues: Victim claimed she was attacked by her husband’s
administrator. Accused claimed he was sexually harassed
by the wife. Accused fled the scene, leaving his coat
behind. Until this incident, the accused had been trusted
with the husband’s entire estate.
Hint: The rest of the story can be found in Genesis
39:1-19.
Answer: Joseph, who was imprisoned after
the accusation by Potiphar’s wife,
though he was innocent. Significance: Doing the right thing
doesn’t ensure that difficulties will not sometimes arise.

Advanced (4)
Crime: Unlawful offering
Location: The Hebrew tabernacle of worship in the desert
of Sinai
Physical evidence: Nothing left of the bodies. Some badly
scorched religious censers for carrying holy fire were found
at the scene.
Clues: Perpetrators were seen lighting their worship
censers from a common fire. Perpetrators displayed no
concern about their actions. God had given strict
instructions about every detail of worship, including the
keeping of holy fire to be used in lighting ceremonies.
Perpetrators related to the high priest Aaron.
Hint: The report of God’s judgment is recorded in Leviticus
10:1-3.
Answer: Nadab and Abihu, who were
burned for dishonoring God’s
presence. Significance: Nothing
profane or defiled should be
brought into our worship of God.

Advanced (5)
Crime: Murder
Location: The city gate at Hebron
Weapon: Dagger
Clues: Victim had killed the brother of the killer in combat
earlier. The killer excused his deed by claiming that the
victim had come to spy on the king.
Hint: This act of vengeance is recorded in 2 Samuel
3:22-30.
Answer: Joab, who murdered Abner. Significance: Once 
again Joab’s coldhearted and calculating character
caused him to murder another for
the sake of his reputation.

Advanced (6)
Crime: Murder
Location: The great stone in Gibeon
Weapon: Dagger
Clues: The victim had recently been designated
commander in chief of the army of Israel after Absalom’s
revolt. The victim knew and trusted the killer. Both the
victim and the killer were on special assignments for the
king, but the killer had reason to want the victim dead.
Killer had a reputation for bumping off rivals.
Hint: This treacherous act is described in 2 Samuel
19:11-14; 20:1-13.
Answer: Joab, who murdered his rival
Amasa in cold blood. Significance:
Yet another example of Joab’s
self-centered life.

Advanced (7)
Crime: Attempted political coup
Location: Jerusalem
Circumstance: Like Absalom before him, a member of
David’s family tried unsuccessfully to take the throne
before David could name an heir.
Clues: Perpetrator first tried to generate public support for
his claim to the throne. He recruited some of David’s inner
circle (General Joab and Abiathar the priest). Nathan the
prophet and Bathsheba were able to derail the coup by
having David make his choice of heir public.
Hint: The identities of David’s chosen heir and this
pretender are recorded in 1 Kings 1:28-53.
Answer: Adonijah, who tried to take the
throne before his half brother
Solomon. Significance: In spite of
human efforts to the contrary, God
works out his will in human situations.


Advanced (8)
Crime: Fraud
Location: Outside Samaria
Background: The victim had recently been healed of
leprosy. The victim was a Syrian military leader.
Clues: The healing had been accomplished without charge.
Even gifts of appreciation had been refused. Perpetrator
worked for the healer. Perpetrator decided to pursue the
victim and convince him that “gifts” would, after all, be
appropriate and accepted. His violation was made known,
and his punishment resulted in him receiving the leprosy
from which his victim had been healed.
Hint: The details of this crime can be found in 2 Kings 5.
Answer: Gehazi, who embezzled gifts from
Naaman. Significance: Gehazi was
punished because his greed
devalued the generosity of God.

Advanced (9)
Crime: Murder
Location: Jerusalem
Details: A royal grandmother tried to kill all of her
grandchildren when she learned that her son, the king, had
been murdered. Only one of the grandchildren was rescued
and later became the king.
Clues: Although this grandmother was part of the royal
household in Judah, she was born in the royal household
of Israel. Her family was cursed by God for its unspeakable
acts of evil. Her only surviving grandson, Joash, was
rescued by his aunt Jehosheba, who was married to a
priest named Jehoida. The murdering queen was later
overthown and killed.
Hint: This story of shame is recorded in 2 Kings 11:1-16.
Answer: Queen Athaliah, mother of King
Ahaziah and daughter of Ahab and
Jezebel. Significance: In spite of
the atrocities that make up low
points in human history, God
maintains control

Advanced (10)
Crime: Assault with a deadly weapon
Location: Mount of Olives, outside Jerusalem
Weapon: Sword
Clues: Crime was committed at night, there were
numerous witnesses, and both attacker and victim were
underlings to more senior people. Jesus rebuked the
attacker even though he was on Jesus’ side.
Hint: The account in John 18:1-11 cuts to the heart of the
matter.
Answer: Peter, who drew his sword and cut
off the ear of Malchus, the high
priest’s servant (John 18:1-11;
see also Matthew 26:47-55: Mark
14:43-48; Luke 22:47-53). Significance: Despite Jesus’ attempts to
prepare them for the inevitability
of his death, the disciples tried to
change the course of events. In
desperation, Peter embraced a
violent method to fight for the
Prince of Peace.

Expert (1)
Crime: Multiple homicide
Location: Shechem in Canaan
Weapons: Swords
Clues: The victims were all adult men. They were
practically helpless because they had recently been
circumcised. The murders turned out to be an act of
vengeance by brothers of a girl who had been raped.
Hint: This tragic event is retold in Genesis 34:7-29.
Answer: Simeon and Levi, Jacob’s sons,
who murdered the men of
Shechem. Significance: Revenge
only begets more revenge. Jacob
feared he would be hated by his
neighbors.

Expert (2)
Crime: Assassination
Location: Nineveh in Assyria
Setting: Victim was assassinated in a pagan temple after
returning from a military campaign.
Clues: The accused were related to the victim. Victim had
recently suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of an
obviously inferior opponent, King Hezekiah of Judah. The
defeat was the result of humble prayer on the part of King
Hezekiah and his spiritual advisor, the prophet Isaiah.
Victim was killed by his own sons.
Hint: This event is recorded in 2 Chronicles 32:20-22.
Answer: The sons of Assyrian king Sennacherib. 
Significance: The king’s arrogance before God was
severely punished.

Expert (3)
Crime: Incest
Location: The mountains near Zoar
Clues: Both daughters bore children fathered by their own
father. The daughters’ plan was deliberate and
premeditated, as they got their father drunk before each
act.
Hint: This tragedy is recorded in Genesis 19:30-38.
Answer: Lot’s daughters. Significance: The
children who came from this relationship were the 
ancestors of Israel’s long-standing enemies, Moab and Ammon.

Expert (4)
Crime: Multiple homicide
Location: Shechem
Circumstance: Political struggle in royal family
Clues: Gideon, the judge of Israel, died without naming an
heir from among his seventy sons. Killers were hired using
money that had been given in pagan worship by the people
of Shechem. All of Gideon’s children were killed except
two: a son named Jotham and the perpetrator.
Hint: The grisly details of this crime are recorded in Judges
9:1-6.
Answer: Abimelech, who conspired to have
his seventy half brothers killed.
Significance: Abimelech’s sordid
means of seizing the crown set in
motion his own demise.

Expert (5)
Crime: Murder
Location: Mahanaim
Weapon: Probably swords
Clues: Killers sneaked into the king’s bedroom and
murdered him while he slept. They cut off his head and
took it to present to King David, whom they wanted to
impress. The killers were themselves executed for having
murdered a king.
Hint: Discover the identity of the killers in 2 Samuel 4.
Answer: Rechab and Baanah, who assassinated Ishbosheth. 
Significance: David refused to take the throne by force, 
even though God had made it clear he would be the next king.

Expert (6)
Crime: Treason
Location: Jerusalem
Circumstance: Rejected heir devised a simple and daring
plan to steal the throne by marrying one of the dead king’s
former wives.
Clues: The perpetrator was related to the former king. The
perpetrator had already tried to take the throne once
before. The king in power had warned the perpetrator that
any further efforts to take the throne would lead to death.
Hint: The tragic fate of this son of a king is recorded in
1 Kings 2:13-25.
Answer: Adonijah, son of David, who tried a second time to 
take the throne of Israel from his half brother Solomon. 
Significance: King David left behind a family in disarray 
created by some of his own failures.

Expert (7)
Crime: Theft
Location: Jericho
Items taken: A costly robe, some silver, and a valuable
bar of gold
Clues: The action occurred after God had given strict
instructions that the only items to be kept from Jericho
would be given to the Lord’s treasury. God’s displeasure
with the theft was revealed when the people were soundly
defeated in their next battle. The items were discovered
hidden under the perpetrator’s tent.
Hint: You won’t have to endure the painful process the
Israelites went through to find the culprit. Read the report
in Joshua 7.
Answer: Achan. Significance: God does not overlook individual sin.

Expert (8)
Crime: Counterfeiting
Location: Jerusalem
Details: Perpetrator lost items of great value and had
inferior replicas made to hide the loss.
Clues: Items had dual use as elaborate decorations as
well as parts of the honor guard’s armor in the palace of a
king. Originals were lost when an invader ransacked the
temple and palace of Jerusalem. Fakes were made out of
bronze to replace the gold originals.
Hint: This fast switch is described in 1 Kings 14:25-28.
Answer: Rehoboam, who lost the gold shields of his father, 
Solomon, when he was defeated by King Shishak of Egypt. 
Significance: The episode represents how quickly the kingdom 
of Israel lost its glory and power.

Expert (9)
Crime: Assassination
Location: Damascus
Weapon: A wet blanket
Clues: Victim was a king of Syria who had been ili. Killer
was sent by the king to Elisha to find out whether he would
recover. God revealed to Elisha that the king would recover
but would soon die at the hands of another. Elisha knew
and was grieved by the evil the killer/messenger would
commit. Only the recovery part of the message was
delivered to the king. The killer carried out his act the
following day.
Hint: This assassination is described in 2 Kings 8:7-15.
Answer: Hazael, who murdered King Benhadad of Syria. 
Significance: God is never surprised by the events of history.

Expert (10)
Crime: Murder
Location: Land of Nod
Weapon: Unknown
Clues: Accused claimed he killed someone in self-defense
who had wounded him. The first capital crime recorded
after Cain’s murder of Abel.
Hint: The accused’s confession is recorded in Genesis
4:23-25.
Answer: Lamech, who murdered an unnamed young man. Lamech’s
vengeful deed showed the rapid decline of human behavior after
Eden.
